Dr. Vandiver, would you please tell us your name?
Frank Everson Vandiver, born Austin, Texas,
December 9, 1925. And
what happened after that? 67 years passed after
that. Your father was a professor? He was a math
professor at Texas, University of Texas. and was
on the faculty for 40 years, so I'm a faculty brat.
And I took my master's degree at the University of
Texas, have no bachelor's degree, and went on and
took my PhD in history at Tulane. Who did you work
under at Tulane? Wendell Holmes Stevens. OK,
that's true. Great man. And spent some time
teaching the summers at LSU, trying to fill in for
T. Harry Williams. which was never an easy job, as
you can well imagine. And was at Rice University
for 24 years. Went to Rice in 1955 and left in really
the end of 1979. And you taught primarily the
South? South and seminars in biography and civil
war, that sort of thing. And I also taught a
freshman U.S. history course, which I greatly
enjoyed. Which I still enjoy. I think it's a great
course. Everybody ought to teach it. Each time I
teach it, I learn more American history, don't
you? You really do. It's wonderful. And that's
where you recruit the students of the future. I
shared the course every once in a while with Bill
Masterson, who I think was the best general
teacher of American history I ever saw. I was
trying to emulate him a lot of the time. And I went in
1979 to
at the North Texas State University. You had
gotten into administration at Rice. Oh, yeah,
yes. I'd gotten in, despite the fact that one year I
shared an office with Walter Prescott Webb, who
had left the University of Texas and retired, and
he came to Rice, and he kept saying, now, no matter
what they tell you, don't go into administration.
So, of course, I didn't listen to Walter Prescott
Webb, and I should have. Got into administration,
became department chairman, which I hated, and
dropped that job, and In between, I got to go to
England as the Harmsburg Professor of American
History, which was a great year at Oxford, and came
back and got stuck with being chairman again,
because I wasn't there when they were selecting
chairman. You know how that is, don't you? Yes. And
then the president of Rice left, Ken Pitzer, he
went back to Stanford as president, And I was
selected as acting president of Rice University.
Apparently, again, for the reason that nobody
else would take the job. And I took the job for the-
What year was that? 1969.
And I think I took the job for a reason that a lot of
presidents take the job. I was afraid of who else
might get it. So I was acting president for 18
months. And then Norman Hackerman came from the
University of Texas. And I became Norman's
provost at Rice and stayed in that job. Let's see, I
was in that job for a year and then I went for a year to
West Point and was professor of military history
at West Point for a year, 73 to 74. Did you like that?
I loved it. I had a wonder. It was like dying and
going to heaven for a military historian. It was
wonderful. And then came back and stayed at, as
provost and finally academic vice president
together until 1979. My wife died in late 78, and
that really changed my whole attitude about
staying at Rice. 79, excuse me. So two weeks after
she died, the offer to go to North Texas came, and it
was, at that time, a very great release for me to go.
And I went and had a great year and a half. I thought
North Texas was a wonderful place. It was just
lying fallow. And it was. And it is a good school,
you know. Yeah, I think it is, too. And I had a
wonderful time there. I learned about one of the
super music schools of the country, which is up
there. It really is great. And I had a good time
there. And to tell you how I got to A&M, I can tell you
exactly the first moment I heard about it. Not
about my original thoughts. I'll come to those in a
minute. But I had gotten up early in the morning,
and I was getting ready to go to the office in North
Texas, and it was over. It was about, oh, 7 o'clock.
It was a day like this, beautiful, clear blue sky,
and sort of cool. And Renee and I were sitting in the
living room, looking out the window at the trees
and having coffee. And the phone rang, and it was
Frank Hubert. And I wish I could tell you the date. I
simply don't remember what the date was. Frank
said, it must have been sometime in early August,
maybe. But he said, I said, my God, Frank, what are
you doing calling me at 7 o'clock in the morning? I
said, are you calling to tell me the name of the new
president of A&M? They had been debating this, and
we'd read in the paper there were 200 candidates
and all this kind of thing. And he said, well, I hope
I'm talking to you. And I almost dropped the phone.
And I said, what? and he said well the 200
candidates we had all busted so he said i threw my
hat down on the table at the board meeting and i said
i'm going to give you the name of the man who ought to
be the president and he said i think they'll
probably go take my recommendation if you're
interested Well, I said, I don't know. You've got
to give me a little time to know. He said, I'm not
going to give you any time to think. You had not even
given it any thought. Not at all. I'd been reading
what they were doing, but it never crossed my mind.
And I said, well, I really am not going to tell you,
Frank, what I think about it, but you can talk some
more. Tell me about the place and what you want and
what the situation is. Excuse me. So he said, well,
we are... We need a president. We've had a
president for a year and a half or however long it
had been. It didn't work out for anybody and for him
and for us. And I'm the chancellor, and I have the
job of selecting you. And he said, if you're
interested, I want you to go down to Dallas and meet
with Bum Bright and John Blocker as soon as
possible. They were both members of the board, as
you know. So I said, well, I'll think about it. He
said, call me back in half an hour. He did not give me
much time. So I went into the living room. Renee
said, what was that all about? I said, well, I don't
know exactly what happened, but I think I was just
offered the presidency of Texas A&M University.
She said, you're joking. And I said, no, I think
that's what happened.
So the next thing I did was call Norman Hackman very
early, right away. He was already in the office,
knowing Norm. He'd been there for two hours. And I
told Norm what had happened and what did he think.
He said, well, they called me, and I suspect
they're actually going to offer you the job. And he
said, now, I didn't think you ought to go to North
Texas because I didn't think they had any money.
And there wasn't much you could do with the
university. But A&M has part of the available
fund. And something can be done there. So I think
you ought to seriously consider going. So I called
Frank back in about an hour, not half an hour, and
said, well, I'll go down and see Bum. But I said, I
can't do it right away because Renee and I are going
to China. A group of presidents of state
universities have been selected to go to China. So
we went to China. And came back. And then I went down
to see Bum. John, and I had a very interesting
interview with them. They asked me the same
question one of them said, you asked, what do you
think about A&M? And I had thought I was probably
asked that question, so I decided to be honest. I
said, this is no time to be coy, gentlemen. You
ought to really know what I think about A&M. I said,
my daughter is in A&M at the moment, and before she
went, though, I had very low opinion. I share the
elitist view of all Rice people that no other
university in the state was worth anything except
perhaps Texas because of my own personal bias but
A&M I thought was sort of a cow college and it was
several grades above the University of Houston
but not too many in my eye and I said I also have heard
several times that the Board of Regents is
impossible to work with And no president told me
straight out. And I said, I don't think, as I
understand it, nobody can survive the board. So I
think you ought to know that I am very dubious that
you and I are going to get along very well. I have a
wonderful board at North Texas. And they said,
said, how can that be? You've got 80 childs on the
board. And I said, that's right. And I thought I'd
have a lot of trouble with 80 childs. But each
meeting, he starts off by saying, we are here. we
have only one legitimate function, to hire or fire
the president. Do I hear a motion to fire the
president? He really did. And hearing no such
motion, our only other legitimate function is to
ask him how we can help him. I said, I have a
wonderful board chairman, and I don't think I want
to trade on that. And they looked a little
surprised, but I thought they were both very nice.
I was particularly impressed with John Blocker,
who I thought all along really knew what the
university was. I wasn't sure that Bum did, but I
knew that Bum's heart was in the right place, and I
could tell that from the interview. And so it went
along very well. I was there two or three hours, two
and a half hours, and they finally said, well,
would you go up to Indianapolis and meet Art
Hanson, who was then president of Purdue?
Excuse me. And they said, he's going to be
chancellor next year. This was almost a year
ahead. But nobody knows him. So you go up and see
him. So I went up and had an interview with Hanson. I
liked him very much. It seemed to go very well. And
that's how I got the job. I came back, and they
offered it to me, and I took it. Had the search been
put on hold here during that time? I'm trying to
remember. I'm trying to remember. I was trying to.
The same thing was going through my mind.
Apparently, they'd run through a great number of
candidates. And I don't know whether it was on hold
or whether it was just nothing had happened. They
just sort of sat for a while. And I said, look, you
can't really offer me this job. And I can't take
this job without visiting the university and
talking to the faculty. This doesn't make sense.
Well, that was a shock. Apparently, that hadn't
been done before. So they arranged a visit for us to
come down, Renee and me, and talk to various
people. I talked to various members of what was the
old academic program council, do you remember?
And I didn't think I talked to enough faculty. I was
talking to administrators. I kept talking to
deans and people like, where is the faculty? And
they just never showed up. There were some members
of the faculty on that council, but not very many. I
still didn't feel that I had a, a broad enough base
of constituency to deal with. But that seemed to be
what, the way they worked it here, so. I remember
one engineer told me, well, why do you want to talk
to the faculty? That sort of shook me up, you know.
And so I took the job. And the, go on, pick up a
question. Could you again comment on your
perception of A&M at the time you, say, walk into
your office, and your sense of what you would like
to do or needed to be done at Texas A&M as president?
By the time I took the job, I had read an awful lot of
material about A&M, including your history, by
the way, that I had not seen before. I'd read all
kinds of material, you know, the catalog, the
budget, all kinds of data, and my impression was
this, that A&M had all the elements to be a great
university. It had a good faculty. It had an uneven
faculty, but basically a good faculty. I read all
the dossiers of the faculty I could get my hands on,
and I thought it had a fine Its greatest reputation
was in engineering and agriculture. It had a
coming reputation in science, but it hadn't made
it. Its liberal arts were depressing, and they
made me feel very bad, for obviously personal
reasons. Its school of education fascinated me,
because I had been brought up in the old attitude
that schools of education were crap, and that they
had no place on a campus of a university. Well, that
was Frank Hubert's realm, and I still remember
being shocked when they split education out of the
arts and sciences and he went with education. I
could never understand that. I know the feeling,
but I was impressed as I looked at the College of
Education with the quality of the faculty. I
didn't know that you could have research in
education, but some people were doing it. So when I
got here, I knew a lot more about A&M than when I
started. And I was... And you probably knew a lot
more about A&M than a lot of A&M types. Well,
undoubtedly, because I had really studied it. You
knew a hell of a lot more, but most of the faculty
didn't know all this about A&M. So I came with a
feeling that... I looked at the available fund and
the PUF and realized that Norm was right. There was
a chance to do something here then. I think it's all
watered down now. But then there was. And the
problem, of course, was going to be, who could I put
in the administration to help me get it done? Get
what done? Get what done? What did I want to do?
Well, the first thing that occurred to me was that
the president of the university ought to have a
vision of an institution, for it anyway, one that
he He may be able to, he can articulate, but he may
not be able to achieve, but he ought to be able to
articulate a vision of the university. And I could
tell from A&M's reputation in things like
agriculture and engineering that it had an
opportunity to be an international institution.
So that's when I came up with the idea of a world
university, not a world-class university, but a
world university. And I really worked toward
that, trying to internationalize the
institution. And then I looked around at the
administration, and you know, nobody wants to
come in and shake the place up immediately. You
want to look around and see what you got to deal
with. And so I made a very careful study of all the
colleges. I went to every college and asked the
dean to give me a whole day's briefing with the
faculty and everybody. So in a period of about six
months, I knew a lot about every college. And that
was a most revealing experience. And I knew a lot
about the deans by then, too. How did the A&M
College structure, let's say, compare or differ
from the other, North Texas, Rice, et cetera? And
this is a leading question that I have at home. It
compared very similar to the North Texas college
structure, colleges of engineering and so forth.
Rice had an entirely different focus. But coming
from North Texas, I could relate to the college
structure here easily enough. Now, Rice has two
different colleges, the residential college
system and then the academic colleges. So you get
all mixed up between the two. But I got a pretty good
idea of what the institution was like. And I liked
what I saw in the deans. I thought most of those were
pretty good. Strong deans. Strong deans, yes. And
they're essential. The provost, or the academic
vice president, when I came, oh, my mind is
leaking. You will remember. I can't help you at the
moment. I was thinking. It'll come to me in a
minute.
Oh, dear. Anyway, it'll come back to me. He said
he'd stay until the end. That's not Mac Prescott.
Yes, it was Mac Prescott. And Mac said he'd stay for
a year, but no longer. Well, I liked Mac. I thought
he was damn good, and I wished he would stay home,
but he obviously wasn't going to. He made up his
mind to go. So I had to look around for an academic
VP, and for another year, I stuck with Chuck
McCandless, who was his deputy. But I was looking
for a provost, and finally came up with... Gordon
Eaton. And Gordy and I got along just fine. We were,
we thought alike and that sort of thing. Where'd
you find Gordon? In a search? Well, we had a regular
search. That was another thing. I started
searches for administrators, which shocked
everybody, you know. I would put together a search
committee with administrators and faculty
members and consequently Obviously this was
iconoclastic. People didn't do that at A&M. And
very soon I began to worry that the APC, I think that
was what it was called, wasn't the body of people
that I needed to deal with. Those were the deans and
department heads. Yeah. And you know, I needed to
talk to the deans and department heads, but I
couldn't find the faculty. My whole orientation
was, how can you run a university if you don't know
what the faculty wants to do? The faculty may have a
view of the university you don't have. And to me,
the faculty is the heart of the university. And if
you haven't got them with you, you might as well
quit. Because ultimately, they're going to
scuttle you. But I couldn't find out who the
faculty was and how to get their opinion. And very
shortly after I got here, I got all hooked up in
football crisis, as you may remember, with Tom
Wilson and the coming of Jackie Sherrill. And that
was a disaster because I really, not a disaster,
but it was eye-opening to me because it turned out I
had really nothing to do with the athletic
program. Turns out the Board of Regents ran the
athletic program. And so I had a big fight with the
Board about that. I made a stand with Frank, and I
told him that if they ran roughshod in and tried to
put a new coach in without me being involved, I
said, I know you have the veto, but if I'm not
involved in the process, I quit. And I wrote a
letter to that effect and gave it to Frank and had a
stormy session with the board. But I said, look,
you guys can't do this. I said to Bum, this is what I
told you when I was talking to you about coming
here. You are running the university, and you
can't do that. How long after you got here was that?
Do you remember? It was about, let's see, we'd been
through one football season. I got here in
September. We went through the football season,
and it was right at the end of that. So it would have
been about January, right after, yeah, January,
February. Did you have a meeting with the faculty
about that time? I did. I'd forgotten that. I'd
forgotten that. I'd forgotten that. We all
dropped our teeth about that time. But you see, my
own feeling was, Henry, I couldn't go on as
president with the faculty thinking that I had
been all screwed up in this football business and
that I just couldn't let the faculty feel. What I'm
trying to say is I couldn't go on if the faculty
didn't approve of what I had done. And there wasn't
a faculty senate to deal with. So I called a
convocation of the faculty. And that may have been
a precedent-setting meeting. Well, I think it
was. And I think the faculty weren't prepared.
They didn't know what was going on. And all of a
sudden, there he is. I think they were, as I was, but
sort of hanging there. Well, I didn't know what
else to do. It was interesting. And I had no other
constituents to deal with. And I thought, well, if
the faculty is going to say no, well, I'll quit. And
I don't think the faculty had ever been presented
with that kind of choice before. Well, and that led
me to the faculty senate business. OK, now where
did that idea come from? What was the precedent?
Did they have it in North Texas? They had a faculty
senate in North Texas. Yes, indeed. And they had a
faculty council, it was called, at Rice, which was
the same thing. But I went on here. And one day, a
group of about three or four professors came in,
led by Tom Kozik. And it was after this board, this
meeting, that I called.
And he said, well, you know, this meeting you
called was very interesting. It reminded me of a
plan. several of us came up with several years ago
to try to push a faculty senate, which he said did
not get very far. And he said, since you seem to want
faculty opinion, how do you feel about a faculty
senate? And I said, boy, I am all for it. So he said,
here. He dusted off an old plan, literally, and
handed it to me. And he said, can you start with
this? So you know what happened? I created a
committee to look into the faculty senate. Claude
Davis was the chairman, who did a great job. The
committee did a wonderful job. They had a hell of a
time, too. They worked very hard. Worked very hard
on it. And they had a lot of resistance. God
almighty, you know. That has changed. I couldn't
believe it. I just couldn't believe it. The
engineering school came to pieces. Veterinary
medicine blew up, you know. How could you do
something like this? We haven't done it this way
before. So
I was very proud of that. I think they did a
wonderful job. And as you know, we turned over all
the functions of the old ABC to the Senate, course
approval and all that sort of thing. And I think
they've done a great job. OK, let me ask you about
the faculty senate. Do you think, how has that
impacted, let's say, on the quality and the
character of the university? Well, I'm probably
not the best one to ask that. You ought to ask the
faculty, I guess. But what I think, let me give you
my impression.
Remember, I'll give you a biased impression
because I was so much in favor of the Senate.
I thought all along that the university, if it was
going to become a first-class institution,
couldn't get there with, you couldn't hire the
right kind of faculty if you didn't get into the
20th century administratively. You know, you
talk to good faculty everywhere, and they always
ask about faculty representation, faculty
governance, and all this kind of thing. So I
thought the Senate was essential for recruiting
faculty. I thought it was essential, too, as an
organization through which the administration
could make its plans known, and could ask advice
and help of the faculty. I really saw the Senate as a
two-way street. Did it work that way? It did work
that way. Not always, but essentially. And I told
that committee that was making up, creating the
Senate at their last meeting, I said, look, when
this Senate is going, the first time I say to
myself, Jesus Christ, why did I do this? You are a
success. And it took about a year, but then I
started saying it frequently. Yes, yes. And I
meant that, and I think that's true. Do you think
there was a tangible result in better recruiting?
Did you sense that? I think so. I think so. A lot of
the fact, I always sat in on recruiting a full
professor. I couldn't do it further down, and I
didn't think it was really my business. Sure. But I
thought full professors... You did interview the
full professors? Yes, I thought I ought to look at
those. And several of them would say, do you have a
faculty center? And I think that was very
important. And through the Senate, for instance,
we worked on, Gordy and I worked on getting the core
curriculum approved. And I wrote to the Senate and
suggested they look at the core curriculum. And lo
and behold, I think they came up with a fine core
curriculum. And they did it. I was really proud of
that. I think one of the main achievements of my
administration was the faculty senate. I was
going to say, I assume that. Yeah. What about the
academic recasting or redirection or thrusting
that you were trying to achieve as president?
Where were you trying to work? I was trying to work
at... Or does a president really have a capability
to sit there and shape those kind of things very...
You can think about it. You can think about it. But
you can't do them until the opportunity comes. I
wanted very strong leadership in two areas where
we had a real problem. You will recall that
agriculture and engineering had gotten into a
serious split of authority The dean, for
instance, the dean of agriculture had almost no
authority. He was the academic dean, but he didn't
have any research money. Remember, it all went off
to the experiment station. And my big problem, I
was trying to think very early on how you get it back
together. The experiment stations and the
engineering experiment stations had been
siphoned off to the system, you may remember.
Well, how can you bifurcate the College of
Engineering and Agriculture that way? It
emasculates the university side, and it creates a
monster from the standpoint of the research side.
If you were a professor of agriculture, and you
also had a joint appointment in the experiment
station, which you would if you wanted to do
research, where did your loyalty lie? It was with
the man who had the money. And so it was a terrible
mess. And the only solution, the obvious one I
wanted to achieve, was to get it back to the
university and have the system say a flag on it and
take it back. Well, Frank wasn't about to do that
because he'd fought the whole battle of trying to
get it saved in the first place. It was old history.
You know about that. Hanson
knew where it ought to be in the university, but he
didn't want to give it up. Sure, that's right. And I
could see that happening. And I kept saying, Art,
you know where it ought to be in the university. Oh,
I know, I know, but it's just going to take a little
while to get this done. So what we did was come up
with this sort of curious two-hatted creature The
first one was Donald McDonald, who you remember
was a professor of engineering, and we made him,
got Art to agree to this, made him dean of
engineering and deputy chancellor for
engineering. He was acting in both capacities. So
he had two hats, but it gave him what amounted to the
power of one office. And that worked. So we worked
that in agriculture.
Perry, got Perry to do that. And that, I think, was
an ingenious dodge that worked. And then the
problem was to get the right person. Donald didn't
want to keep it. Donald, you know, he took a hell of a
beating in that job. It was terrible. because the
faculty didn't understand it and the faculty
didn't want it. There was a lot of contention. You
remember. You remember. It was really a mess. And
then everybody thought Nichols were at stake,
too. Oh, yeah. Yeah. They sure were. Yeah. And it
was a mess. And he took a real pounding. I thought he
ought to wear a flak jacket every day over at the
engineering school. So the problem was to get the
right people. And that's where the faculty senate
helped, because we had one.
Gordy and I put together a search committee to look
for both a dean and vice chancellor of engineering
and of agriculture. And we had a hell of a time
recruiting Herb Richardson, but we did it. Herb
was dean of engineering, you know, at MIT. And it
turns out that he was actually slated to be
president. But I think the thing that saved us was
he didn't know that. And we didn't either. Have you
ever told him that? No. And so it was sort of like a
soap opera. Every week we would wonder how we were
doing in recruiting Herb Richardson. We'd have
him and then we wouldn't have him. It's like
landing a great big fish. And Gordy and I both knew
that. We knew that if we could land Herb
Richardson, steal the dean of engineering from
MIT, we had made it. A&M had made it. And it was vital
that we get him. So then we went to get Charlie
Arnson for agriculture, and he was with, oh,
what's that big company that he came from?
He was their research director. It's a big ag
corporation, and I can't think of the name.
Anyway, but again, he was a member of the National
Academy of Sciences, and Herb was a member of the
National Academy of Engineering. That's the kind
of quality we were looking for. And getting them
both was a big moment. And to me, it represented the
arrival of Texas A&M on the national scene. Good.
Now, how are you and Hanson collaborating or not?
Very well. Very well. Art's problem, and I say this
with affection because I like Art, was he could
never make a decision. Gordy came back from some
meeting after we had been announced he was coming
here, and he'd run into somebody from Georgia
Tech. You know, he'd been at Georgia Tech before,
Hanson had. And he said, the man looked at him and
said, has Art made a decision yet?
And that was true. That was true. But he was, Hanson
knew what a university ought to be, and that's what
counted. So when you'd go in and you'd tell him,
look, we're trying to recruit somebody like Herb
Richardson, he understood that. Now, where is the
board? right now in all of this? The board was very
supportive of this kind of thing. As long as you and
Hansen were basically together and presented a
united front. Yeah, yeah. One of the board
members, Dooley Bell, whose name you may
remember, told me one time, I'd been telling the
board that one of my objectives was to get either
raised internally or hire a Nobel laureate.
because I thought that a great research
university wasn't one unless it could recruit at
that level. And he told me one day, he says, by God,
you better recruit that Nobel laureate fast,
because people are getting mad at the way you're
recruiting all these highfalutin faculty
members. But that made me feel good. That meant the
board was concerned and knew what I was trying to
do. Now, they might not like it, but they
understood it. And Hanson understood it, and he
explained it to them, what we were trying to do. So
we got those two, and then I went after... Is Bum
still... Bum is still chairman of the board. Then
one day Perry called, and he said, how much do you
really want to recruit a Nobel laureate? I said,
pretty much, Perry. He said, well, I think we have a
shot at Norman Borlaug. And oh my God, that was...
Then we got Norman, as you know, And that was
another great step forward. Then we got Derek
Barton in chemistry. And that was another great
shot in the arm for us. And you know, my feeling was
that if you could recruit at that level, Henry, you
didn't have to worry about being a national
institution anymore. Right. Or a world. That's
right. People knew you. That's right. And you
know, we recruited a wonderful black playwright
who was a Pulitzer Prize winner. Then we began to
hit that kind of stride. These are sort of
tangential questions, I guess. What's your
relationship, let's say, with the former
Students' Organization about this time? Is there
any collaboration, association, friction, et
cetera? All of the above. All of the above. A lot of
change. A lot of change on the campus. Many old eggs
were not at all sure that this was the right way to
go. Again, we hadn't done it this way before. And I
was emphasizing things a lot of them didn't really
think they wanted at A&M. There was enough trouble
over women, but that was still bubbling. But this
big business about recruiting all this
high-powered faculty and talking about world
universities and research all the time we ought to
be here teaching agriculture you know and
engineering that was a it was a problem and i had to i
went before the a meeting of the one of their annual
meetings they have here and explained what i was
trying to do just told them straight up and i said
look my favorite line i used it whenever i could
talk to the alumni look if this place is just like it
was when you were here everybody's failed
Everybody's fizzled from the beginning to the
end.
And I said, you shouldn't be sitting out there and
wanting it to be just the way it was. Don't come to me
and tell me that. You don't impress me with that
line. And it really shook them up, you know. But
it's true, Henry. Again,
on the former students, do you think they, from
your other university experiences, are really a
unique Oh, yes. They are. And they have, they
have... Are they a blessing to the university?
They can be both a blessing and a curse, because
they have tremendous power. They have real power
with the board, because the board, up until
recently, has been essentially them,
represented them. One board member, I always
thought, he was at one time president of the former
students, and He was a politician, his
profession. So I right away figured out what he was
doing. He was looking for his constituency, and he
represented the students perfectly. Then he got
on the board, and I was hoping he would switch and
his constituency would be the university, but he
never made that switch. So the board, since it so
often comes from the former students, can also be a
problem because they're reflecting what they
hear out among the former students. troops but and
there also can be a great help because i when i was
trying for instance to fight the budget crunch in
austin in 85 84 and 85 when we first got the turn down
what were the total years in here 81 to 88 um
i got great help from the board and i got great help
from the the aggie mom yeah wonderful group just
wonderful and they would they'd go to austin
they'd talk to everybody you know on the board the
former students would do that too i'd often tell
the moms had more clout than the purpose well i
always thought that the moms were the best asset
that i could count on i used them all the time for
politic direct political health and got it and
they were tickled because nobody had used them
that way before and they really liked that what
about uh I
was about to come to that, because shortly, my mind
is vague on the dates, Henry. As a historian it
shouldn't be, but it is. I
don't know. It's a good thing we're not
journalists.
It must have been about 82.
that a
group of faculty came to see me.
Oh, what's that lady's name? Wonderful faculty
member. Sociology? Yes. You know who I'm talking
about. Oh, yeah. She was wonderful. She came with a
group. cox not not uh no no um schaefer yeah ruth
ruth came to me yeah with a group and uh i remember
she came to me about this time when i was department
head yeah well she you know i didn't know whether to
throw her out or listen to her at the time well you
know she came and blasted at me you know how ruth can
be and i sort of sat back and i thought she was my
friend yeah And it suddenly dawned on me as I
listened that this lady was raising my
consciousness in the old terminology, and she
really was. So I said, okay, are you going to put
your money where your mouth is? I'll create a
committee to look into minority affairs, but you
have to run it. She said, all right. So she, you
know, they put together a report, which was an
excellent document, and it was going to cost, the
program for minority recruiting of both students
and faculty was going to cost $4 million.
And I said, all right, I will take this to the board.
And boy, did I run into a big fat puzzle. Big fat
problem. One board member says, you goddamn
liberal Democrat, you're trying to change the
university. I said, that's right. Not because I'm
a liberal Democrat, but because the university
needs changing. And that made him mad. But they,
with Art Hanson helping, and with Bum also
helping,
you know, Bum was an odd character in many ways.
I'll talk about Bum separately. The board finally
bit the bullet and appropriated the money. How did
you persuade them? Well, it took two or three
different meetings, and it took a lot of meeting
upstairs in the regent's quarters. I was greatly
helped by John Coleman, the black regent from
Houston. He was, I always thought, the one regent
who knew what a university was. I'll tell you
another story about him later.
And Royce Weisenbaker,
And
Clyde Well. Remember Clyde? Oh, yeah, I remember
him real well. They all... He was on the board when
Rudder was here. Yeah, he was on the board 24 years.
All of these people, and there were one or two
others I can't remember. All the allies I was
counting on. I was sort of operating like Lyndon,
trying to count the votes with each meeting. But
this group And Norman Mosier, Norman Mosier,
would all put it this way. Well, we don't like to do
this, but it has to be done. So they voted the $4
million. But then they said, okay, you're stuck
with it. You have to make something happen. So then
I went back to Ruth in the committee, and I said,
okay, now you're stuck with it. Be careful what you
pray for. You've got it. Now make something
happen. And it did. It did. It did. Never, I guess,
to satisfy enough people. No, but she said the
first thing we have to do is have some edict from
your office that this is important. I created
extra jobs in departments for minority
recruiting. And I think it was a great step
forward. And we did very well in recruiting
students, but we were way behind in the pack. I
said, look, I told Ruth, I said, now, you're going
to be impatient, and you ought to be, but you've got
to remember, if we get one, we're 100% better than
we were yesterday. Another question, I guess,
relating to minority recruitment students. What
about the Corps of Cadets during these years? How
were they deferring, and were you having
problems? The Corps was doing very well. The old
system, in effect, when I was here, it wasn't
necessarily that old, was that there was a senior
professor of military science who ran the Corps,
but also was a professor of whatever, air or, you
know, Army or Navy. We then had the case of Mr.
Goodrich, whom you may remember, the cadet who
died, was killed by over... work, remember? Yes, I
sure did. And I think this was the thing that
triggered it. There may have been an earlier
episode. Well, it was shortly after I got here
during the SMU game, there was the case of the
Sabre. Oh, you were here for that, too. Oh, I was
here for that, too. That was my second football
game. That was a great moment. And I had to write the
president of SMU a letter of apology, which
infuriated the Corps of Cadets that I would
apologize. And I had a meeting with the Corps, and I
said, look, I said, you know, you're supposed to be
officers, not necessarily gentlemen. But
officers conduct themselves with probity in a
moment of crisis. That's why you're an officer.
And if you can't act that way, you don't need to be an
officer. You should be busted. Yeah, I would have
thought you had more understanding and
compassion for the Corps than many Presidents.
Yes, but I think that point was quite right. But the
case of Goodrich convinced me that there was real
trouble in the Corps that I didn't know about.
Neither did Coldress, who had only a tenuous
connection. You know, the Corps has always had the
strange rule of the organization which allows
them to manage themselves. And I don't think
that's a way to run a Corps. A Corps can't manage
itself.